At first glance, programming a computer appears as easy as
unscrambling a Sanskrit crossword puzzle. Can these intimidating
machines be controlled by those of us who cannot balance a
checkbook or identify a transistor?  What if we foul up the
computer?  Does programming belong to the professionals, or is it
a skill the average computer user would benefit from?
     These are the kinds of questions Abacus recently asked of
Lyle Faurot, a computer consultant from Moorhead.  Lyle has been
involved with computers for the past two decades.  He began
studying about computers on his own while in the Air Force and
received further training from the University of Minnesota during
his years of post-graduate study in the field of vocational
education.
     Besides his work with larger computers, Lyle has taught
courses on using the personal computer and related software.  He
displays a vibrant enthusiasm for the potential of personal
computers.  Lyle is a free-lance consultant for small business
users who want to learn how to make the most out of their
computer systems.

ABACUS: Why would an ordinary person even want to learn a
programming language in view of all the professional software on
the market?

LYLE: There are several reasons.  First, programming is fun.  To
see a task and make the computer do it is personally rewarding.
Secondly, it is difficult to find a commercial package that will
do all that you want it to do.  Though the selection is getting
better all the time, you always find some needs that have been
overlooked in commercial packages.  Thirdly, most users of
commercial packages are forced to do some programming themselves
anyway.  dBASE III is an example of a software package that
really contains its own programming language.  You can't take
advantage of its power and features without knowing something
about programming.  Learning some basic techniques helps you set
up programs like these to do all they can for you.

ABACUS:  Are men more adept at programming than women?

LYLE: No.  I've trained both men and women.  I haven't noticed
any inherent difference in their ability to work effectively with
computers.

ABACUS: Do you need any special skills or abilities?  What if you
don't like math?

LYLE: The idea that you have to be a whiz at mathematics is an
old myth.  Almost anyone can learn how to set up a condition--to
tell the computer "If THIS happens, then I want the program to do
THAT."  Mathematicians have no corner on the kind of thinking
required to structure a useful program.

ABACUS: What language would you recommend for the new computer
user?

LYLE: I'd recommend BASIC.

ABACUS: Why?

LYLE: In BASIC it is easy to get started doing things where you
can see your results.  To enjoy learning people need feedback--
they need reinforcement.  It's fun to type in a few short lines
of instructions and then watch something happen.  BASIC was
designed for that purpose.  It is a teaching language that helps
you pick up skills rather easily.